The Vice President: Well, thank
you all for being with us.
Thanks to the members of
the National Space Council.
And why don't you join me
in thanking the President
one more time for his
leadership and hospitality,
you know?
(applause)
We're honored to be
at the White House today.
And the presence
of the third meeting
of the National Space Council
here at the White House
surrounded by members
of our council
as well as by members
of our user advisory group
and other industry leaders
and our distinguished
panelists I trust
is a reflection
of the priority
that you just heard
in the President's words,
that the President
and our entire administration
are placing on American
leadership in space.
I do want to --
I do want to say thank you again
to all of the distinguished
guests who are here,
to members of the user
advisory group,
but also to distinguished
members of Congress
who've already
been introduced.
We are grateful
for your leadership
and grateful for your presence,
but not surprised
by your presence today.
And so, join me in thanking
these members of Congress
who've already been introduced.
We appreciate them very much.
(applause)
We have a great lineup
of panelists today,
three panels that
will all be working
under the umbrella
of our conversation
about the Moon, Mars,
and worlds beyond.
And the focus today will be on
how we continue to move forward
to permit greater --
a private development of space
as you just heard
the President reflect on,
but also how we revive
and continue to expand
human exploration in space
with American leadership
and American platforms.
We're going to begin
with reports
from members of
the National Space Council.
And to all the cabinet members
who are with us today,
I want to thank you
for the efforts that you've made
and all the agencies
that are represented here.
It represents the very best
of the kind of teamwork
that the President relies on
in this administration,
and we're grateful for it.
And with that, to kick things
off, Secretary Ross,
if you could provide us
with an update
on the work of
the Commerce Department
implementing the President's
Space Policy Directive-2.
We'll begin there.
Secretary Ross: Mr.
Vice President and members
of the National Space Council,
it's an honor to be
with you again today
and to have joined
President Trump
as he signed
Space Policy Directive-3.
Since we last met
in February,
Commerce has been working hard
to meet industry needs,
conducting regulatory
reforms critical
to commercial space growth
and making America the flag
of choice for space commerce.
My staff and I
have met with dozens
of space-related companies,
from the large to
the small launch providers
to the satellite data collection
and Earth observation companies
and the innovators
who plan to bring mining
and manufacturing into space.
We always hear the same thing:
America is leading
in space once again
under the leadership
of President Trump.
There's a booming economy,
an actively engaged
and supportive President,
and a cabinet committed
to cutting red tape.
Space Policy Directive-2, signed
by President Trump last month,
directed the Department
of Commerce and other agencies
to execute regulatory
reforms that will advance
business opportunities in space.
Commerce has much to report.
On May 24th, the same day
President Trump signed SPD-2,
we announced our plans
for a new space policy
advancing commercial enterprise
or space administration
under my direct supervision.
Commerce's existing
Office of Space Commerce
and the Commercial Remote
Sensing Regulatory
Affairs Office,
both now buried deep within
NOAA, are being consolidated.
Our establishment of
the Space Administration
will not create
more government bureaucracy.
Just the opposite.
The Space Administration
will consolidate
and streamline activities
previously spread
throughout the department
and the executive branch.
Our space commerce
reforms are led
by the department's
regulatory reform officer,
a position created
by President Trump's
executive order 13771
to direct deregulation efforts.
The new space administration
will be a one-stop shop
within the department
for promoting,
administering,
and regulating commercial
space activities,
including remote sensing,
export controls,
GPS, spectrum policy,
business and trade promotion,
and standards in technology,
and now space traffic
management as well.
This week, ahead of schedule,
the department will also
submit to the White House
Office of Management and Budget
a legislative proposal
to solidify our industry-focused
Space Administration.
I'm also excited
to announce now
a new director of the Office
of Space Commerce,
a presidentially-
appointed position
that's been left vacant
for about a decade.
Under the leadership
of Kevin O'Connell,
the Office of Space Commerce
will once again
be the government advocate
of the U.S. space policy.
We look forward to having
Kevin on board soon.
He's spent 35 years
in government
and private sector
leadership roles,
working in national security,
intelligence, and commerce.
He is the perfect man
for the job.
Space Commerce is getting
dedicated attention
at the department once again.
In line with the
President's directive,
Commerce is also reforming
the 25-year-old
commercial remote-sensing
regulatory environment.
Regulations must keep up
with advancing industry,
not slowing it down.
Last week, as promised,
the department submitted to OMB
our advanced notice of proposed
rulemaking on remote sensing.
It will be posted in the
Federal Register this week.
This proposal seeks industry
feedback on streamlining
and simplifying
the commercial remote
sensing approval process.
New regulations are needed
to accommodate
changing technologies
and business activities.
After the 60-day
comment period,
Commerce will issue a new
proposed rule this fall.
We've already made
significant improvements.
Commerce has signed an agreement
with the departments of Defense,
State, Interior,
and the director of
National Intelligence to reduce
wait times on satellite
remote-sensing applications.
The agreement sets more
definitive decision timelines
for licenses,
elevates decision-making
to senior government officials
if the deadlines are not met.
Before its implementation,
the average time
to receive a NOAA
license was 210 days.
Now, the average time
to grant licenses
has been reduced
by more than 50 percent
to an average of 91 days.
Over the last couple of months,
we've shown that government can
and must work together to adapt
and enable new
business activity.
Earlier this year, SpaceX, like
many other launch companies,
was not previously aware
that the second-stage
camera recording
and live video feed
of its Falcon 9
launch were regulated
under the National
and Commercial Space
Programs Act.
The law requires authorization
of camera activity from objects
in Earth orbit
to protect national
security interests.
On May 3rd, we approved
a blanket remote license
for SpaceX's future
rocket launches.
The license grants
SpaceX permission to image
while in the second stage
of their launches.
A first of its kind,
this license is valid
for all launches
with certain specified cameras
and is valid through
January 1st, 2019.
The license was processed
through an expedited review
with interagency partners
in only 23 days.
This license permits SpaceX
to publicly livestream imagery
from space providing
certain parameters are met,
including time and position.
The Department will pursue such
blanket license opportunities
for all similar companies
to alleviate the need
for repeated,
onerous applications.
This is a great example
how government can work quickly
when it wants to.
Next week, we will begin
interagency discussions
to implement space
export control reform.
And our National
Telecommunications
and Information Administration
is coordinating with the FCC
to conduct spectrum
management analyses
essential to the future
success of space businesses.
And finally, as announced
this morning in SPD-3,
we will begin to take on a role
as the civil agency interface
for space traffic management
and space situational awareness.
I commend President Trump,
Vice President Pence,
and the Space Council
for finalizing the first
comprehensive policy
on space traffic management.
It is really needed.
Over 600,000 bits of space
debris fly around the Earth
at tens of thousands
of miles per hour.
Amidst the torrent
of space debris,
there are over 800 operational
American satellites
critical to U.S.
national security,
Earth observations,
weather forecasting,
public safety, and GPS.
Their solar panels
are especially vulnerable
to space debris.
And there are thousands
more satellites on the way soon.
These devices are
the magnificent result
of billions of dollars of public
and private investment,
and efforts must be
taken to protect them.
We will work closely with DoD
and other departments
to meet the challenge
of increased commercial
and civil space traffic.
The transition will allow DoD
to concentrate
on its main objective:
defending and securing
the United States
from threats here
on Earth and in space.
At Commerce, we're well-suited
for these new responsibilities.
Most objects now going into
space are in fact commercial.
And as a friend
of business agency,
we act as a facilitator
of business,
not as a typical
old-fashioned regulator.
We already engage industry
on a host of issues,
stretching from export
licensing to trade promotion
to licensing abuse in space.
Commerce will immediately
begin working with industry
to determine what basic SSA and
traffic coordination services
are needed by
private companies.
And we'll use our
preeminent SSA technologies
and improve government services
to incentivize more companies
to launch under the U.S. flag.
These efforts and others
to come from President Trump
and the Space Council
will make new activities
in space possible,
but only because of the
ingenuity and innovative spirits
of the people in this room.
Non-traditional activities
like space tourism,
asteroid mining,
space manufacturing,
and lunar habitation
will soon become a reality.
Commerce is driving
in today's space race.
And the department looks forward
to working with all of you
as we expand upon
the bounds of humanity
and develop the last
new business frontier: space.
Thank you.
(applause)
The Vice President: Good job.
Is Kevin O'Connor here?
Secretary Ross: Pardon me?
The Vice President: Is
Kevin here?
Secretary Ross: No.
The Vice President: Thank you,
Secretary Ross.
Thank you for all
of your efforts
so carefully enumerated
about how we make
the American flag
the flag of choice
for space commerce.
Well said. With that,
Secretary Chao,
the President's Space
Policy Directive-2 assigns
some ambitious goals for the
Department of Transportation.
Would you please
give the council an update
on your ongoing work?
And let me thank you in advance
for all of your efforts
moving together
the President's agenda
to really streamline
and advance
the development of space
on a commercial basis.
Secretary Chao: Thank you,
Mr. Vice President.
As the President
mentioned six years ago,
the U.S. was third.
Today, we are number one
with 15 commercial launches
in just the first
six months of 2018.
The department is committed
to building upon this momentum
by streamlining
and updating its launch
and re-entry licensing criteria
in accordance with
the President's directive.
That will give commercial
space operators
the approvals
that they need more quickly
and help to make
the United States
be an even more
attractive place
for commercial
space enterprises.
Here's an update
on what we're doing.
First, the department will
release new proposed regulations
for licensing commercial launch
and re-entry activities
by February 1st, 2019.
The new rules will enable
a single license framework
and replace many prescriptive
and sometimes
unnecessary regulations
and requirements with
performance-based criteria.
We're working closely
with the industry,
our government partners,
and the National Space Council
as we develop these
new regulations.
Second, the department
has created an aviation
rulemaking committee
consisting of industry,
our government partners,
and other important
stakeholders.
And as a result,
this committee has provided
a comprehensive set
of recommendations
to help us better understand
what the new rules
should look like.
We have also met with
our partner at the Air Force
and NASA
to discuss how the department
can better enable
commercial space
launches without impacting
adversely national security.
I'm happy to report that
we're making good progress.
Third, the Commercial Space
Transportation Advisory
Committee
has been revived
and met last week.
It will provide
continuous insights
that will help shape policy
and enhance the
department's approach.
Fourth, as the department
moves forward
on this extremely important
regulatory streamlining effort,
we have remained very
focused on continuing
to make timely
determinations for licenses.
And fifth, the department is
studying new technologies
to help meet increased
demand as commercial space
launches move through
our country's busy airspace
managed by the FAA.
As an example, the Space
Data Integrator Project
has tremendous potential to help
reduce the amount of air space
and time that must be blocked
off for commercial launches.
This will facilitate the safe
and efficient integration
of commercial space
flights into our airspace
while minimizing the impact
on other airspace users.
And finally, the department
has chartered
two additional aviation
rulemaking committees.
The first addresses
airspace access priorities,
and it will provide a forum
for commercial space
and traditional
aviation stakeholders
to work with the FAA
to minimize airspace conflicts
and to propose criteria
that may be used
to ensure fair access
given more demand.
The other committee addresses
spaceport categorization.
Spaceports support
different operations.
New opportunities
from aircraft-based
launches are changing
the definition
of what it means
to be a spaceport.
So, this committee
will be a forum
where the aviation and space
communities can come together
to discuss a spaceport
characterization
and categorization scheme.
This will provide clearer
information on safe operations
to perspective
spaceport enterprises,
nearby aviation
infrastructures, and the FAA.
So taken together,
all of these actions
send a very clear message
to companies around the world.
If you want to license
a commercial space operation,
America is the place to do it.
A recent study concluded that
the commercial space industry
will triple in seven years
to $27 billion annually.
If America wins
a significant market
share of this new industry,
it could help drive
economic growth,
technical innovation,
and job creation.
So the department
is committed to fully
and safely integrating
this growing sector
into our
National Airspace System
by streamlining
licensing approvals,
removing unnecessary
regulatory burdens,
leveraging new technologies,
and working closely
with stakeholders,
all stakeholders.
The department has
a roadmap in place
to help ensure that America
remains number one
in the commercial space sector.
Thank you, Mr. Vice President.
(applause)
The Vice President: Great job,
(inaudible).
Well, thank you,
Secretary Chao.
Thank you for your tremendous
efforts and let me also --
let me also say that I know
the Department of Transportation
took very strong steps to reach
that February 1st, 2019 deadline
regarding commercial
launch and reentry.
And why don't you all join me
in thanking the secretary
and her whole team
on hitting their marks --
Secretary Chao: Thank you.
The Vice President: -- on new
regulations and deregulations.
(inaudible)
Secretary Chao: Thank you.
The Vice President: Great job,
great job.
With that, the new
NASA administrator
has already been called out
and recognized warmly
by this crowd,
but let me add
my congratulations
to Jim Bridenstine
as the new
administrator of NASA.
Jim Bridenstine: Thank you, sir.
The Vice President: We are
grateful to have you --
Jim Bridenstine: Thank you.
The Vice President: --
on the team and in this council.
I'm going to welcome you
to your first meeting
in the National Space
Council and grateful
to have you sitting
in the chair and at --
representing NASA
in this conversation.
Last December, the President
signed Space Policy Directive-1,
which directs NASA to return
American astronauts to the Moon.
We have discussed
that at some length
privately and with your team.
To the Moon first,
and as the President said today,
eventually to Mars.
I know you've been diligently
working with your team
to develop a strategy
to implement
that space policy directive.
And I wanted to invite you
to give the council
an update on your work.
Welcome.
Jim Bridenstine: Yes, sir.
Thank you.
First of all, sir, it's an honor
to serve my country in this
capacity, honor of a lifetime.
And I'd like to thank you
and the President
for this opportunity.
I would also like to thank
your executive secretary here
on the Space Council,
Scott Pace,
who, when all
the lights are off --
I hear some --
(applause)
Jim Bridenstine: -- when
all the lights are off
and the cameras aren't rolling,
he works overtime
to make sure this group
is focused on a whole of --
a whole-of-government approach
under your direction.
So, thank you, for that, sir
and thank you to the executive
secretary, Scott Pace.
I'd be remiss if I didn't
also mention Jared Stout,
who worked side-by-side
with Scott Pace on these issues.
(applause)
So, we are underway,
executing the President's
Space Policy Directive-1,
which is our effort
to return to the Moon.
And interestingly, we heard
the President give his speech.
He talked about it
being sustainable.
I wrote a few notes down
of some things he said.
He said that we've had
a number of opportunities
to go back to
the Moon since 1972.
He didn't mention
them specifically,
but the space
exploration initiative,
the vision for
space exploration,
and each of these efforts got,
in essence, undermined,
the words he used were,
"by bureaucracy and politics."
And so, our objective now,
following the direction
of the President
is to get back to
the surface of the Moon
and back to orbit around the
Moon in a sustainable way.
And he said --
if I remember right, he said,
"We want more than just flags
and footprints this time."
He also said,
"Rich guys love rockets."
And I've heard him
say that before.
That's an important
thing to recognize,
because the architecture
that we're building now
is entirely different than
any architecture we've ever
built before in an effort
to get to the Moon.
And the reason is we have
more capabilities
now than we've ever
had as a nation,
largely because of the efforts
of many people in this room.
The idea that we have
reusable rockets
to bring down the cost of launch
and give us more access at
a lesser cost than ever before,
the miniaturization
of electronics,
these capabilities enable us
to do more, in fact, with less.
Although, thanks to you
and the President,
we're doing more with more,
which is a good thing
for the NASA budget,
and we're grateful for that.
So, the opportunities
before us are immense.
And initially, when we
go back to the Moon,
there's a number of things
that we need to do.
We need low Earth orbit to be
driven by commercial enterprise.
And that's underway right now.
Under the President's
budget request,
the International Space Station
will no longer receive
direct support in the year 2025.
In some ways, that's a big
challenge for us at NASA.
And we understand
the challenge before us,
but for the first time,
we're having very
serious conversations
about how to make low
Earth orbit commercialized.
We want --
we don't want any gaps
in human activity
in low Earth orbit,
and that means
commercialization is the key.
Then we can take our resources
at NASA and go further.
In other words, to the surface
of the Moon and then on to Mars.
The first program that we have
getting to the Moon
is called CLPS,
the Commercial Lunar
Payload Services.
What we called it in -- at NASA,
what we talk about
is taking shots on goal.
Commercial Lunar
Payload Services,
these are not
expensive missions,
and they're not carrying
heavy payloads.
But we're going to give
commercial companies
an opportunity to land
on the surface of the Moon,
and we would be
a customer of that.
They would have
other customers as well,
but we would be
one of many customers
in a very competitive market
with as many as six
or even more providers
for our access
to the surface of the Moon.
The reason this is important
is because
all of these capabilities
in a competitive
environment result,
in effect, not just
competition on price,
but competition on innovation.
So we can do more than
we've probably ever done before.
It's also important to note,
Mr. Vice President,
that when we go this direction,
we are taking shots on goal.
Not every shot gets made,
so it is very possible
that some of our
commercial providers,
who we believe there are
a number of them that are ready,
but maybe some of them are not.
So there is -- there is a risk
that some of them
won't be successful.
But what we learn through this
Commercial Lunar Payload
Services program
will be critical
for the next step,
which is heavier landers
not just capable of
delivering instruments,
but capable of delivering
prospectors,
things that can dig.
We know -- from NASA's
achievements back
in 2008 and 2009,
we know that there are
potentially hundreds of billions
of tons of water ice
on the Moon.
From 1972 until then in 2009,
we didn't know that there was
water ice on the surface.
We now know that.
So that represents
an opportunity for us
to learn more about the Moon
than we've ever learned before,
because we're going
to go to the surface,
and we're going to prospect.
That means we need heavier
landers that can --
that can carry things
that can prospect
the surface of the Moon.
And then beyond that,
we need heavier landers
that can take humans
to the surface of the Moon.
So, this is an iterative process
where we're building capability
that we really haven't
had, sir, since 1972.
While we're doing this,
we're also going to put in orbit
around the Moon
what we call gateway.
This is our opportunity
to have more access
to more parts of the Moon
than ever before.
When you land on
the surface of the Moon,
you're in one spot
on the surface of the Moon.
But what we want is we want
access to the entire Moon.
We also want to make sure
that everything we develop
is reusable.
This ultimately
gives us more access
to our international partners.
It puts us in
a leadership position
where the standards
and interfaces
are established
by the United States of America.
And then the Landers that go
from the gateway to the Moon,
the tugs that go from low
earth orbit to the gateway,
it's all reusable.
And it becomes a critical
piece of infrastructure
that we can then capitalize on
with our commercial partners
and our international partners.
Again, the goal here --
following the President's
Space Policy Directive-1,
the goal is sustainability.
We do not want this to be Lucy
and the football again.
When we go to the Moon,
we're going --
and as the President
said in his speech,
this time we're going to stay.
And the gateway gives us
that great opportunity.
It's also important to note
that as NASA develops
these capabilities,
each one of these
capabilities feeds forward.
The reason we go to the Moon
is because we want
to land Americans
on the surface of Mars.
And the technologies,
the capabilities,
the institute
research utilization
that we develop for the Moon
will ultimately get us to Mars.
It's also why the gateway
is so important.
Having an orbital outpost
around the Moon
gives us more access
to more parts of the solar
system than ever before.
And all those technologies
are being
developed in and around the Moon
for the purpose of eventually
getting humans to Mars.
So, sir, I would say that
Space Policy Directive-1
is well underway.
We've got a long ways to go,
but we're started.
And certainly, we want
to get back to the Moon
as quickly as possible,
thank you.
(applause)
The Vice President: Great.
Good job.
Really good, no notes.
You did all that
without any notes.
It's great to have you --
great to have you on board
and in your position.
With that, he was just
acknowledged a few moments ago.
Dr. Scott Pace is the director
of the National Space
Council staff.
And Dr. Pace, if you'd
give the team an overview
of today's
Space Policy Directive-3
and the implementation plan,
we'll take action on that
and then move very quickly
to our two upcoming panelists.
Dr. Pace?
Scott Pace: Thank you,
Mr. Vice President.
It's an honor to be here.
Now that Space Policy
Directive-3 has been approved,
departments and agencies
are working to transform
that policy into action.
The interagency working group
has designated leads
and supporting
departments and agencies
for each of the goals
in the policy,
outlining key tasks necessary
to achieve that goal.
And they're establishing
implementing actions
that involve the lead
and supporting agencies
tracking progress
and reporting back to the
council at regular intervals.
The interagency
working group planning
has been coordinated and
endorsed at the deputy's level.
And I should add that
this has been a very thorough
and rigorous process
that has involved
all of the departments
and agencies.
And we very much appreciated
the really deep thought
that people have
given to that effort.
Mr. Vice President,
it's important to emphasize that
while there are roles
and responsibilities
outlined in Space
Policy Directive-3
and designated lead departments,
that doesn't mean that
government organizations
will perform all those actions
to achieve each goal
or that they will somehow
prevent U.S. industry
from contributing to
space situational awareness
and space traffic management.
In fact, the policy
and implementation plans
are intended to establish
an architecture
or a framework that encourages
commercial development
of enhanced space safety
data and services.
We want to take advantage
of the growing innovation
in the private sector
that's going to be so necessary
for this to succeed.
There's a copy of the plan
in each of your binders.
And the last page of the plan
summarizes those implementation
actions and due dates.
We are respectfully asking
the council to approve
this plan for implementation
of the President's policy.
And with the council's approval,
we will initiate tracking of
the implementation actions
and look forward
to providing updates
at future council meetings.
Thank you, sir.
The Vice President: Oh,
thank you, Dr. Pace.
Are there any outstanding
comments or objections
to the implementation plan
that's in your books?
Seeing no objection, I direct
the executive secretary
to enter the implementation
plan into the records
of the National Space Council
and to make publicly available
a fact sheet
on the policy
and on the plan.
I also direct
the executive secretary
to work with the members
of the National Space Council
to develop periodic updates on
the implementation of the plan.
But thank you, Dr. Pace.
Scott Pace: Thank you, sir.
(applause)
The Vice President: Great job.
I'm going to ask
our first panel to go ahead
and make their way
up to the table.
For this first panel, we're
going to be discussing science
and exploration missions
and the vital connection
between the two.
I want to commend
Administrator Bridenstine
and his leadership team
for the efforts
that you just reflected on,
strengthening the bonds
of cooperation and collaboration
between science and
human exploration
directorates at NASA.
You're breaking
down the barriers,
and that's exactly
what the President and I
are hoping to see.
We're grateful to be joined
by three truly
distinguished panelists,
who are going to speak
in greater detail
about the important ways
in which our science missions
complement our exploration
missions and vice versa.
I'll describe each
of the panelists,
and then I'll recognize you for
maybe five minutes of remarks.
And then we'll have
some questions from
members of the council.
Our first panelist
is Dr. Louise Prockter,
director of the Lunar
and Planetary
Institute in Houston, Texas.
Our second panelist is Dr. Steve
Squyres, the James A. Weeks
professor of physical
sciences at Cornell University.
And our third panelist
is Mr. John Vellinger,
president and CEO of Techshot,
a space company based
in Greenville, Indiana.
With that, join me in welcoming
this very distinguished panel
for coming and sharing
their perspective.
(applause)
Now, Dr. Louise Prockter
is recognized.
And thank you for being here.
Louise Prockter: Mr.
Vice President,
members of the council,
thank you very much for
this opportunity to speak today.
Science and exploration
enjoy a powerful
synergistic relationship.
Scientific research
drives exploration,
and exploration creates
new opportunities
for scientific discovery.
This synergy is no more
evident than at NASA,
which, in its almost
60 years of existence,
has been the embodiment
of humankind's need to explore,
to explain why we're here,
and why our Earth is so unique.
Throughout those six decades,
robotic exploration has proven
to be a fundamental
and essential component
of NASA's space program,
enabling incredible
scientific discoveries
about our solar system
and universe.
In the beginning,
robotic spacecraft
also served as pathfinders
for the manned program,
with the many ranger
and surveyor missions
characterizing the Moon ahead of
the astronauts who visited it.
And since Apollo, robotic
spacecraft have continued
to feed the quest
to explore and learn.
They have traveled
far beyond Earth's moon,
examining asteroids, comets,
and with the recent
successful flyby of Pluto,
every planet in the
classical solar system
as well as many
of their moons.
Robotic missions are even
now being developed
to thoroughly examine
ocean worlds,
the few bodies
in the solar system
believed to harbor
the ingredients of life
and maybe even life itself.
Robotic spacecraft active scouts
going to hostile environments
that no human
can safely visit yet
and returning
scientific knowledge
that benefits our society
in innumerable ways.
Robotic exploration
stimulates investments
in technology development
that are highly significant
in achieving national
and economic goals.
Space-exploration-related
technology
has resulted in advancements
in a broad range of areas,
including transportation,
public safety,
consumer goods, industrial
productivity, and health.
We must not underestimate
the importance of education
in this marriage of science
and exploration.
My own Institute was created
by President Lyndon Johnson
50 years ago for the specific
purpose of bringing NASA
and the university
community together.
It was realized
that the expertise
of scientific researchers
was needed in order to analyze
and interpret the treasure
trove of information
that was being returned
from the Moon around that time.
In addition to carrying out
cutting-edge research,
universities play a key role
as incubators
for highly-skilled scientists,
engineers, mathematicians,
technologists, and educators,
who then move into our nation's
workforce in many areas,
not just space exploration.
Hands-on science
and technical training
is just as important today
as we plan the return
of humans to the Moon
and beyond as it was when
we first met that challenge.
The U.S. civilian space program
pushes our scientific
and technological limits,
making the seemingly
impossible possible
and driving the creation
of new partnerships
with government, commercial,
and academic organizations.
NASA's accomplishments
capture the attention
of citizens
and nations worldwide,
emphasizing the U.S.'s
global leadership in space
and creating opportunities
for peaceful
and mutually beneficial
international collaboration.
Thank you.
The Vice President: Thank you,
Dr. Prockter.
Next, I'd like to hear from
Dr. Steve Squyres
of Cornell University.
Dr. Squyres, you're recognized.
Steve Squyres: Thank you.
Mr. Vice President,
members of the council,
it's a real honor
to be here today.
For almost 60 years,
the U.S. space program
has been an inspiring example
of American ingenuity.
Throughout that time,
exploration and science
have gone hand-in-hand.
Robotic precursor missions
provide crucial data
for designers of human missions
and define the scientific
goals for human explorers.
I'm a robot guy.
I've spent my career designing
and operating robot explorers,
but I firmly believe
that the human explorers
can achieve far more science
than robots ever will.
I also believe that the humans
versus robots debate
that we sometimes here
in space circles
is based on a fundamentally
false premise.
Humans and robots
are complementary
in their strengths
and their weaknesses.
And a well-designed
scientific space exploration
will always use both.
Our nation's civil space program
is at a pivotal moment
now in its history.
Space Policy Directive-1
clearly articulates the goal
of sending humans back
to the Moon and on to Mars.
This goal is clear,
compelling, and achievable.
A return to the Moon
is valuable before proceeding
to more challenging targets.
It's been more than 45 years
since astronauts have ventured
beyond low Earth orbit.
The Moon is an ideal place to
validate the new technologies,
vehicles,
and operational procedures
that will be needed
to send astronauts
beyond the Earth-Moon system.
The Moon also offers exciting
scientific exploration
Steve Squyres:
-- in its own right.
Preserving in its rocks
a record of the earliest events
of the Earth-Moon system,
as well as possessing resources
that could enable ventures
deeper into the solar system.
Now, beyond the Moon, exciting
targets for exploration beckon.
Foremost among these is Mars.
Forty-plus years
of scientific observation
by Mars obiters, landers,
and rovers have revealed
a world of enormous
diversity and complexity.
Most importantly,
we have learned that Mars,
alone among the planets,
is enough like Earth,
the conditions that
its surface might once
have been capable
of supporting life.
So, the goal for human
exploration of Mars is,
therefore, compelling and
very easy to articulate.
It is to send humans
to the planet to learn
if life ever took hold there.
This is a goal worthy of a
great national space program.
So, a guiding principal
in designing
our nation's lunar exploration
should be that
it also simultaneously
lays the groundwork
for the still more
challenging goal
of sending humans to Mars.
And at the same time
as humans and their robot
helpers focus
on the Moon and Mars,
more advanced robotic missions
can press deeper
into the solar system.
Important targets
include the ocean world
to the outer solar system,
especially Europa,
a moon of Jupiter
that appears to have
a deep ocean of liquid water
that might be capable
of supporting life today.
New technologies also now
allow return of samples
from a wide range
of planetary bodies.
These include Mars and comets,
and this allows us to bring
the full capability
of Earth's best laboratories
to bear on the solar system's
most important
scientific questions.
Now, a compelling program
of scientific space exploration
of the Moon, Mars,
and beyond will be
neither easy nor inexpensive.
Committed international partners
really can make an important
contribution
to an American-led program.
But more importantly, commercial
enterprises in the United States
can partner with the government
to spur innovation
and reduce cost to the taxpayer
while adding value
to the program.
The scientific exploration
capabilities offered
by potential
commercial partners, to me,
represents the most important
and enabling space
development in recent years.
Thank you for the opportunity
to address this council,
and I look forward
to the discussion to come.
(applause)
The Vice President:
Thank you, Dr. Squyres.
And Mr. John Vellinger
of Techshot is recognized.
John Vellinger:
Vice President Pence,
distinguished members of
the National Space Council,
it's an honor to appear
before you here today
at the White House.
I'd like to describe
how Techshot,
the company I cofounded
in Indiana nearly 30 years ago,
is an innovative engine
that uses space
to help make life
better here on the Earth
while also enabling
deep space exploration.
One of our most
exciting projects
focuses on 3-D
bioprinting in space
with the goal of
manufacturing human tissues
for patients here no Earth.
Right now we are building the
Techshot BioFabrication Facility
which will launch to the
International Space Station
early next year.
We will start with
simpler tissues,
such as patches that can
help heal damaged hearts,
and steadily increase
in complexity
until we are biomanufacturing
whole organs from space.
The bioprinter may also
play a critical role
in deep space exploration
where it could be used
to make food items,
or function as
a compounding pharmacy,
enabling the remote formulation
of drugs optimized
for each crew member.
Besides our own use
of the system,
we will also allow
others to use it.
It will join our catalogue
of Techshot-developed equipment
currently onboard he station,
which we provide
as a commercial service.
For example, researchers from
Eli Lily, Novartis, and UCLA
have used our bone densitometer
X-ray machine in space
to study new drug treatments
for osteoporosis
and muscle-wasting diseases,
both of which affect people
here on the Earth and crews
in deep space during
long-duration missions.
Astronaut Terry Virts
actually got to operate our bone
densitometer on
the International Space Station.
So, thank you, sir.
I believe that NASA and its
Commercial Space
Utilization Program
and the Center for the
Advancement of Science in Space
are successfully
increasing demand
for low Earth orbit
and commercial space services.
And Techshot is providing
many of the picks
and shovels
that researchers are using
in the 21st century
goldrush to space.
Beyond the commercialization
of low Earth orbit,
our contributions
to exploration
currently focus on other
new technologies
that enable mission
success into deep space.
Techshot is prototyping for NASA
a machine we call
the Techshot FabLab,
which is capable of 3-D
manufacturing metals,
ceramics, plastics, and more.
It can even print complex
electronic assemblies.
If the agency
likes our approach,
the technology will be
refined for testing
aboard the
International Space Station
and eventually deployment aboard
the Lunar Orbital
Platform-Gateway
that the NASA administrator
just mentioned.
Techshot's FabLab
will also be used
in austere environments
here on Earth,
such as onboard submarines
that must remain submerged
for months at a time.
President Trump,
Vice President Pence,
under your leadership
the United States
is entering an unprecedented
golden age of space flight,
which is presenting
multiple opportunities
to advance global
American competitiveness.
Techshot is proud to be
playing a critical role
in this unique time
in space history.
For this opportunity,
I thank you.
(applause)
The Vice President:
Good job.
Well, thank you to
all of our panelists.
I will begin by asking
one of our panelists to amplify.
And then I'll go to General
Dunford for a question
and then to our Deputy Assistant
Chief Technology Officer
of the United States, Michael,
and any other members
of the panel.
Let me start with
Dr. Squyres, if I may.
You said you're a robot guy.
Steve Squyres:
Yes, sir.
The Vice President:
And we already knew that.
Steve Squyres:
(laughs)
The Vice President:
But I'm really fascinated
at the way
you described an appreciation.
It's not -- in your mind,
it seems that
we have gotten away
from human space exploration
and the President's
vision and directive
is to return America
to a preeminent role
of space exploration
of the Moon and Mars,
as you described.
How important is it for us,
in your mind again?
And I know you addressed this,
but I'd love for you
to amplify the point that we,
even while we continue
to develop
all these robotic technologies,
that human space exploration
could be central
to what we do on the Moon,
and on Mars, and beyond.
Steve Squyres:
It's tremendously important.
If I may, let me tell you
a very brief story.
When we were first developing
the Mars exploration rovers,
we had a robotic precursor rover
that we could take out
into the Mojave Desert.
And I was out there,
and we were operating the rover,
and the rover broke down.
And so, we had a little
time on our hands.
I had a bunch of very capable
field geologists with me.
And so, I sent them off
and I said,
"Go do some geologizing, okay?"
And I sat there with
a stopwatch and a notebook.
Didn't tell them
what I was doing.
And I watched as
they would look around,
walk over to a rock,
pick it up, break it open,
and look at it
with their hand lens.
And I timed how long
it took them to do that.
What our magnificent state
of the art robots,
like that one the model of which
is on the table in front of you,
can do in a day, these people
were doing in about 30 seconds.
Okay?
So, humans offer far,
far, far greater
capability than robots,
I believe, ever will.
The other thing is that humans
have a capability to inspire
that is tremendously
important, okay?
I grew up in the '60s and '70s
like everybody else on my team
watching Mercury, Gemini,
Apollo on T.V.
and dreaming of sending
spaceships to Mars someday.
And now we do.
And so, I think that capability
to use
uniquely human talents
to explore
and to inspire other humans
to follow their dreams
is something that is just
fundamentally important.
The Vice President:
That's great.
And our next panel will be
three courageous astronauts.
We'll hear more from them
about just that topic.
But I thought I'd give
a robot guy (laughs)
a chance to talk about how
important human exploration is.
General Dunford?
General Dunford:
Hey, thanks, Mr. Vice President.
My question is
for Mr. Vellinger.
The Defense Department
is partnered on bioprinting
and biomanufacturing
with obvious interest
for our wounded warriors.
And so, you're comments
kind of caught my attention.
What are the advantages
of doing bioprinting
and biomanufacturing in space?
The implications
for maybe the speed
with which we can approach that?
There's a lot of promise.
And of course, academic
institutions, and so forth.
But we haven't
necessarily been able
to deliver it
at scale to date.
John Vellinger: Great question.
Thank you, sir.
In space, we have
a unique opportunity
because of microgravity.
Here on the ground
when we bioprint,
we have to actually include
a scaffold structure
into the tissue
that you're printing.
In space, you don't
have to do that
because you don't have gravity.
So, you can use a lower
viscous bioink material
which helps cells
vascularize easier in space.
So basically, you eliminate what
actually causes more difficulty
to do bioprinting
on the ground.
You eliminate that process
when you go to microgravity.
And you have the opportunity
to create different structures
that can vascularize and help,
you know, human beings
here on Earth
with tissues and organs.
General Dunford:
Thanks.
The Vice President:
Michael, go right ahead.
Deputy Assistant Kratsios:
Great, thank you,
Mr. Vice President.
Just to build on that,
Mr. Vellinger, just a follow-up.
I mean, we see a pretty
incredible potential
for pharmaceutical
and medical breakthroughs
made possible through research
in low Earth orbit.
I guess the question
for us on stage here
is what can we as a government
be doing better
to encourage and foster
more of that research
and expediate
the ultimate fruits
of this incredible research?
John Vellinger:
Thank you, sir.
I think access
to space is important.
The repeatability to be able
to do these projects
more often is very,
very important.
Being able to have
the ability to interact
with the crew,
the astronauts,
to be able to advance
the technology
and work within real time
is really important.
And so, I think, you know,
interaction with the crew,
access to space,
and just support
of the technology.
The Vice President:
That's great.
Any other members of the panel?
Jim?
Administrator Bridenstine:
Thank you, sir.
I couldn't let Dr. Prockter
go without a question.
So, we know that -- based on
what NASA has already done --
we understand that Mars
used to have an ocean.
Louise Prockter:
(affirmative)
Administrator Bridenstine:
Potentially as big as two-thirds
of Mars was covered by water.
We know that it used
to have a magnetosphere.
And we know that it used
to have a thick atmosphere.
And we know that at some
point billions of years ago
all of that changed.
And now it is seemingly barren.
We also know --
although not definitely barren.
Hopefully, we'll be able
to find some biosignatures.
We also know,
if you look at Venus,
it's experiencing runaway
green house effects.
Can you share with us?
As a NASA administrator,
I hear a lot that every dollar
we spend studying other planets
is a dollar we don't spend
studying our own planet,
which I believe is
critically important as well.
Can you share
how important it is?
Or what we can learn
by studying the Moon?
What can we learn
about our own planet?
by studying Mars?
What can we learn
about our own planet?
Louise Prockter:
Yeah, and actually I would
completely disagree
with that statement
that every dollar spent
exploring other planets
is not a dollar spent
exploding the Earth.
Everything we learn
about the solar system
tells us something
about our Earth.
You can think of the solar
system as a giant laboratory.
If you want to know what happens
if you change gravity,
you can go to
a different planet.
If you want to know what happens
if the climate runs
out of control,
you can go to Venus.
So, every time we explore
another body
we learn something
about the conditions
that make our own planet
so very special
and so hospitable to life.
Particularly with --
the other thing about planets,
they don't have trees.
They don't have
buildings on them.
You know, a lot of
the surfaces are pristine.
Or they have evolved
in certain ways
that are similar
to our own planet.
So, essentially
everything we learn
throughout the solar system
and also from small bodies
and from other solar systems.
Now we're starting to look at
axillary planets and understand
again
what makes the conditions
just right for our Earth
to be where it is in this
very special place and time.
So, it's really a very
cost-effective way
of looking back in time
at our own Earth
and understanding
how we got here.
Administrator Bridenstine:
Thank you.
The Vice President:
Well, join me in thanking
Dr. Louise Prockter
and Dr. Steve Squyres,
and Mr. John Vellinger.
Thank you so much
for your testimony today.
Very helpful and very well done.
(applause)
Well done.
Next, I'd like to invite
our next panel to step forward.
We're honored to be joined today
by three American astronauts.
And we'll now, having spoken
about the interrelationship
between scientific exploration
and human exploration,
now we will talk about
getting your perspective
on how we accelerate human
exploration of the solar system.
Before I do that, I thought
it was noteworthy today,
June the 18th, to acknowledge
that it was 35 years ago today,
on June 18th, 1983,
that Sally Ride made history
when she stepped on
to the Space Shuttle Challenger
and became the first American
woman to venture into space.
Sally Ride is an American hero
whose courage
and pioneering spirit
continue to inspire
countless young Americans
across this country
to pursue their dreams.
Earlier this year,
the U.S. Postal Service
unveiled Sally Ride
Forever as a stamp,
and I know all of you
join me today
in honoring her memory
and celebrating her legacy
at this meeting
of the National Space Council.
(applause)
As I mentioned, we are joined
by three exceptional Americans,
heroes all, members
of the Astronaut Corps.
And we are grateful.
Grateful for your service
to the country and grateful
for you bringing your
insights with us today.
And they're not
the only astronauts here,
but they're the only ones
that haven't been
introduced much yet.
So, let me do that.
Our first panelists
are Colonel Eileen Collins,
the first female
pilot and commander
of a space shuttle mission.
Colonel Collins, it's an honor
to have you here today.
Thank you so much.
(applause)
Our second panelist is
colonel Terry Virts,
a veteran of the shuttle program
and a former commander of
the International Space Station.
Colonel Virts, thank you
so much for your leadership
and your insights today.
(applause)
And Dr. Scott Parazynski
is a veteran of five flights
on the space shuttle
and a deeply respected member
of the Astronaut Corps.
Thank you so much for
your presence here today.
(applause)
With that, we'll ask
each of the panelists
to share for a few minutes.
And then we'll move on to
questions for this final panel.
And Colonel Collins,
you're recognized.
Colonel Collins:
Good afternoon.
And tying, Mr. Vice President
and members of
the National Space Council.
It's really an honor to be here.
Thank you for the invitation.
Scott, and Terry, and I are part
of a group of about 500 people
who have flown in space.
We have had
the unusual perspective
of viewing the Earth from orbit.
We've lived aboard the space
shuttle and the space station.
We've conducted
rendezvous space walks,
science experiments,
and robotics.
We saw our planet from
a different perspective
in an environment
that forced us to think
creatively about
how things are done
and what things can become.
So, I became interested in space
flight at a young age
when I first learned about the
Gemini and Apollo astronauts.
They inspired me
to become an explorer.
And eventually
to join the Air Force
and become a pilot
and a test pilot.
As I look back over the decades
of human space flight,
the daring launches of Mercury
and the incredible bravery
of the men
that flew to the Moon,
I'm so proud of what the
United States has accomplished.
Some say that we could
have done more.
We could've been to Mars by now.
But what is important now
is that we have a strategy
and we're looking forward,
we stick to our plan,
we don't quit.
And of course, we remember
the lessons learned
from the mistakes of the past.
We must keep our missions
as simple as possible.
We must keep the costs
as low as possible.
Occasionally I have to
remind myself of an old
saying that I heard
from the Apollo program.
Better is the enemy
of good enough.
So, it doesn't all have
to be the latest technology.
But it does have to be safe,
reliable, and mission focused.
So, I'll mention
a few priorities
for the future
of human space flight.
First, reestablishing
our country's ability
to launch astronauts
from within the United States.
It's been almost seven years now
since we last saw
an astronaut launch
out of Florida.
Now, for safety reasons,
I certainly don't think
this should ever be rushed.
We're on a good track now.
But I believe we need
to keep an eye on the future
and have a future strategy
to avoid us getting back
in this situation again.
Second, I support
the long-term goal
of landing astronauts on Mars.
For this to be successful,
any critical equipment
that's destined to Mars
should be tested first
on the surface of the Moon.
In my written statement
I reference a study
from the National
Academy of Science
entitled "Pathways
to Exploration."
Now in that report they cite
10 critical technologies,
and I'll mention the top three:
Mars entry, descent,
and landing; radiation safety;
and power and propulsion.
But another notable technology
is the life support equipment,
which includes systems
that recycle air and water.
Now, these are being tested
right now in the space station.
But the Moon provides a more
advanced test environment
due to it's similarity to Mars
in radiation environment
and in dust.
And third -- this is
almost a no-brainer --
but I support
the commercial partners
and the international partners.
This is really essential
for our space program.
And by the way, I believe --
I personally believe --
that space tourism someday
will be hugely successful.
And finally, just as
I was inspired
by the Apollo astronauts,
a new generation of young people
will want to study science
and engineering in an effort
to be part of this
great journey.
And they will also wonder
what is out there?
What discoveries
are waiting for us?
And can I go?
(applause)
The Vice President:
Thank you so much,
Colonel Collins.
Great words.
And Colonel Terry Virts
is recognized.
Thank you for being here.
Colonel Virts:
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Vice President
and distinguished members
of the National Space Council,
thank you for inviting me today.
It's an honor.
For several decades, America's
human space program was focused
on low Earth orbit.
And for years, we have not had
a clear long-term vision
or goal for human
space exploration.
However, these are
exciting times
and we now have the opportunity
to clearly define such a vision.
I believe that we should use
the Apollo model
as an example
of how to proceed.
However, Apollo
was actually the sum
of three distinct
programs, as you know.
Mercury, and then Gemini,
and then finally Apollo.
Project Mercury demonstrated
that flying in space
was possible.
Gemini developed and
tested the technologies
that we would need to go
to the Moon eventually.
And Apollo was, of course,
the final mission.
And that Apollo mission was
very clear to land on the Moon
and return safely to Earth.
The President's recent Space
Policy Directive-1 calls
for returning to the Moon
to establish a foundation
to eventually enable
missions to Mars,
a plan that
I strongly agree with.
Today, our top priority
needs to be turning
this high-level vision
into very specific goals
so that we can plan and execute
an architecture
that will achieve them.
Using the Mercury, then Gemini,
and then Apollo paradigm,
the ISS has already
fulfilled the Mercury role,
demonstrating that humans
can live and work in space
for extended periods of time.
And now is the time
to establish a program
that will fill
the role of Gemini,
developing and testing
the technologies
that we will need to return
to the lunar surface
and eventually fly to Mars.
Unfortunately,
the recently proposed
Lunar Orbital
Platform-Gateway
does not fill
that role of Gemini.
It essentially calls
for building
another orbital space station,
a skill that my colleagues
and I have already
demonstrated on ISS.
Gateway will only slow us down,
taking time and precious dollars
away from the goal of returning
to the lunar surface
and eventually flying to Mars.
I believe that we need
to refocus our efforts
to align with these
long-term goals.
The next steps that
we take should leverage
the international partnerships
that we have built over
the past two decades on ISS.
And of course, they should
also take advantage
of our significant
commercial capabilities
that have demonstrated very
recently a level of innovation
and agility
that government simply
does not possess.
And most importantly,
any future exploration plan
must be bipartisan.
Unless these efforts are truly
bipartisan from the beginning,
they will be doomed
to eventual cancellation.
You see, getting back
to the Moon
and eventually to Mars does
not depend on rocket science.
It depends on political science.
Thank you, sir.
(applause)
The Vice President:
Nice, I'll come back to that.
(laughter)
Great statement.
Thank you so much, Colonel.
And Dr. Scott Parazynski
is recognized.
Thank you so much
for being with us.
Scott Parazynski:
Mr. Vice President
and distinguished
members of the council,
thank you so much
for the honor and opportunity
to share my views
with you here today.
And it's also great to share
the panel with my good friends,
Terry and Eileen.
I grew up in the shadow
of the pilot program.
My father actually
worked to help design
and test the mighty
Saturn V boosters
that went to the Moon
in the late '60s, early '70s.
And so, I never grew out
of that boyhood dream
of one day flying in space.
And it turned okay
for me, I guess.
I feel so fortunate to have
been born at a time
and a place when such a lofty
trajectory was possible.
As a kid, I wanted
nothing more than
to set the first
boot prints on Mars.
But I'm fiercely proud of the
work that my NASA coworkers
and I did to help the stage
for this inevitable journey.
It's an incredibly exciting time
to be engaged in
the space business
in what I call
the barnstorming era
of commercial
human space flight.
With so many pioneering
American companies
leading with innovations
and investments.
That said, the space age
2.0 needs to overcome
some enormous challenges
if we aim to be more than
just transient lunar
and Martian guests.
We'll need to engage the public
in very different ways
to sustain their support.
Building long-duration
planetary habitats
and shielding them from the
devasting radiation exposure,
not to mention developing the
technologies to extract water
from the near absolute
zero temperatures
of the South Pole of the Moon
will challenge engineers
to their limits.
Living off of the land
in self-sustaining colonies
there will help us become even
better stewards of planet Earth,
something that deeply
concerns young people today.
Based on rigorous
peer-reviewed science,
they understand the impact
humanity's having
on their oceans,
coral reefs, atmosphere,
and rain forests.
And they want to do
something about it.
They have a vested interest
in the health
and well-being of Earth
and can really appreciate
the value of pursuing
planetary exploration
as a means to understand
the future of their home planet.
Moreover, many in
the general public,
and especially young people,
are as excited about space
as I was as a kid.
But the possibilities
are even wider.
It's still incredibly cool
to work at NASA, of course.
But they can also now work
at SpaceX, and Blue Origin,
and Boeing, and Virgin Galactic,
and many other
wonderful companies.
In the near term, I believe
that there will be
tremendous opportunities
to engage
and inspire the public
with the establishment of
a significant lunar outpost akin
to the South Pole Station
in Antarctica.
Owing to political realities
since Apollo, however,
I'm frustrated with
our national failure
to comment to a sustained,
bold exploration
beyond Earth orbit.
Sadly, we could
probably stack up
all the NASA studies
that've been done over the years
on NASA's next steps into
to space and attain lunar orbit.
I believe that the way you
climb an enormous mountain,
like Mount Everest,
which is somewhat that I also
know a thing or two about,
is to take the long view,
prepare to your utmost,
and then take it one
rope length at a time.
Sometimes even one
breathless step at a time.
Understanding that it'll be
harder than you ever imagined,
it'll likely take longer
and cost more, too.
I propose a true
decadal approach
to ambitious human
space flight goals,
similar to that taken by
NASA's space science community.
I suggest to you that this
human space flight decadal plan
needs to be free
of appropriations earmarks
to particular space
centers or companies.
But rather latched
to the long-term goal
of achieving lunar
and then Martian presence.
Set the goals,
then let NASA choose
and fund
the very best solutions,
irrespective of which
congressional district
the work is conducted in.
Measure and reward successes.
Acknowledge and cut failures.
But then keep moving
forward towards the prize.
So in closing, I just
suggest to you
that one of the greatest
accomplishments
of the International
Space Station program
has been bringing
together nations
for the common good of humanity,
pooling resources
and the best minds,
and bringing the world
closer together.
I'm convinced that the first
Martians have already been born
and they're already preparing
for humanity's next giant leap.
It's my greatest wish
that this journey
will be led by Americans.
But I also hope that we'll take
those first steps in peace
and partnership with colleagues
from around the world.
Thank you very much.
(applause)
The Vice President:
Thank you, Scott.
Very inspiring words.
Did you say one
rope length at a time?
Is that?
Very sage.
It strikes me that
each of the panelists
talked about the importance
of not only a plan
but the ability to sustain that
plan over a long period of time.
And Terry I was
struck by your words,
but the wisdom
of your words that said
this is as much about
political science
as it is about rocket science,
in terms of getting America,
as the President has announced,
back to the Moon
and then onto Mars.
And Eileen, you mentioned
those three questions.
I remember the last one.
What is out there?
What were the three
questions again?
Colonel Collins:
What is out there?
What discoveries
are left for us to make?
And can I go?
(laughter)
The Vice President:
Yeah.
I know the answer
to third one for me.
So.
(laughter)
I guess I'd throw the question
out to the panel as a whole.
And that is other than
your inspiring example
in your words today,
which will make their way across
the country from this forum,
how would you advise
the National Space Council
to continue to build
the momentum
behind a renewed
commitment to America
leading in space exploration
and, particularly, in human
exploration of the moon and Mars
and beyond.
Eileen?
Colonel Collins:
Well, thank you, sir,
for the question.
I think we can
all chime in on that.
But I would think, initially,
we have got to get the support
of the American people
by getting the message
out to people.
And we all speak at schools
and colleges and Rotary Clubs.
People love the space mission.
And it's something
that brings us together.
And not only students show up,
but parents, teachers;
people come.
If we, on the National
Space Council, can get --
somehow use the media --
I say the "mass media"
because we want to get
our message out --
we all hear our message.
You know, here in this room
and within the space industry,
we all hear ourselves,
but we don't want to be
just echoing our own remarks.
We want to get that out.
So, one of the things I think
we can do is work very hard
on connecting
with mass media.
Colonel Virts:
Yes, sir, I think --
I agree with Eileen,
but I think we really need --
and it's probably your job
to set specific goals
of exactly what
we're going to do
so that we know
what we're doing.
And, then, if we can make
the bipartisan, like I said.
Otherwise, it will be
on that stack
of what NASA's happened
in the past few decades.
And another really
important thing,
if you remember
in the early '90s,
the Space Station passed
Congress by one vote.
And the reason it did was
because it was an
international program.
And that was kind of --
we weren't allowed to cancel it
because we had commitments.
And, I think, making that
international commitment,
just by the nature
of our democracy,
it's very easy
for things to change.
And having an
international partnership
adds a little stability
that doesn't make it nice,
or it doesn't make it
less expensive,
it actually makes it
either possible or not.
I think, if we don't have
international partners,
just looking into the future,
I can foresee things
being much easier
to cancel than they would be
given a strong partnership.
And using what our
international partners
can contribute can actually make
the project less expensive
and, you know, more successful.
Scott Parazynski:
I think taking the long-view,
having a long-term
established goal
and inexorably
working towards it
is something that needs
to be communicated well.
And, I think, young people
will understand
that there is a place for them.
And I would just differ
slightly to say
that I think space
exploration is nonpartisan;
I think it's something
that's in the American spirit
and the human spirit to explore.
And if you go to any school,
any community,
there's a strong support
for continuing
to press the boundaries
in exploration
because it benefits
all of our walks of life.
The Vice President:
Well, I thank you for that.
I'm going to recognize
Secretary Chao for a question,
but I --
would all of your agree
the importance
of having our own platforms
to be able to reach space?
When you see the excitement
being generated out
of the commercial
space industry,
but very soon the United States
will have the ability
to put courageous astronauts
like you back in space
on our own platforms.
Is that -- do you see that
as an important part
of generating the connection
between the popular support
across the country
and the reality of support
that translates
into a sustainable commitment
to leadership in space?
Colonel Virts:
I think we all agree (laughter)
very strongly
by that statement, yeah.
American leadership
and the world looks to us,
and, you know, Europe
and other countries
look to America
for that leadership.
And I think we need
to lead, for sure.
It's a big part
of what America is.
The Vice President:
Right, good.
Okay, Secretary Chao.
Secretary Chao:
Gosh darn it,
the Vice President
asked my question.
(laughter)
But, I have another one,
and that as a former
Secretary of Labor,
I'm always very concerned
about workforce development.
So, Dr. Parazynski, there's been
a lot of discussion about,
you know, the future
of STEM studies --
Scott Parazynski:
Yes.
Secretary Chao:
-- in our nation.
How are we on the right path?
Do you think we're doing better?
Or do you see the need
for any course corrections
and how to get more
young people excited?
Scott Parazynski:
When I talk to young people,
I tell them that it's important
to learn a couple
of foreign languages;
and not the traditional
languages that you might expect.
I tell them that the two
most important languages
that they need to learn
are math and science.
To be competitive in the future
industries in robotics,
as Steve is engaged in,
but in so many different aspects
of our future society
and technological growth.
And so, that's the message
that I would put forward.
Colonel Collins:
Could I add something to that?
Secretary Chao:
Of course, Colonel Collins.
Colonel Collins:
I think, maybe,
the federal government
does help students go out
and get a college education
with whatever degree
they would like.
But if we could
incentivize them,
financially,
in some of the programs
to go towards math
and science, technology,
engineering,
I think that would help.
Secretary Chao:
Mr. Vice President,
before I hand it over,
I want to that all these
three for their service
to our country,
how exciting.
Thank you.
(applause)
The Vice President:
Secretary Ross.
Secretary Ross:
Thank you.
I'd like to ask
each of the panelists,
how could we better facilitate
commercial participation
in the activities
you're describing?
Each of you talked
about the need
for partnerships
and collaboration,
are there one or two
specific things
that government
could do better
to encourage
commercial cooperation?
Scott Parazynski:
I can start.
One of the things
that I've known
from my prior life in industry
is just the difficulties through
the federal acquisition process.
It's a very long pathway
and if there are ways
to streamline
that to make it
more entrepreneurial,
quick turnaround,
as I think one of
the prior panelists said.
It's important to have
access to space,
to be able to fail,
to get back up and go again.
And so, we need to have
frequent access to space
and, I think, one of the ways
to make that possible
is to figure out ways to shorten
the acquisition process.
Colonel Virts:
Yes, sir, I'll just add,
I've got very good friends
and former crewmates
that work at
Blue Origin and SpaceX
and Boeing and other companies.
And the speed that they can
do innovation is really amazing.
And, I think, if the
government can come up
with ways to contract with them
with very minimal
requirements --
there's this thing called
"requirements creep"
and that is the killer of all --
the Wright brothers
probably had to suffer
through requirements creep
(laughter)
100 years ago.
If we can figure out a way
to get those contracts made,
and let them innovate;
tell them what we want
and then let the companies
do the work,
I think we can get things done.
And I know we're in the process
right now of doing that.
So, I think we need
to continue that process
and we'll get
to the moon and Mars
a lot quicker if we do that.
Colonel Collins:
Yes, sir, the NASA administrator
had mentioned earlier
about the incentives
right now that
NASA is giving small companies
to go to the lunar surface
and, you know,
starting small, small landers
and then building up from
there to larger landers
and maybe, eventually,
the human lander on the moon.
So, I -- NASA's doing this now.
It's small, but I think
if it's successful,
we should expand on that
and give more incentives;
just turn them loose.
Don't tell them,
"You have to do it exactly
this way per the requirements."
But tell them,
"This is the end goal,
figure out how to get there,
here's your financial incentive
to get you started."
I think that those
programs be successful.
And, we'll keep an eye on them,
but I think we can --
we'll eventually
be doing more of those.
Secretary Ross:
Well that's good,
I think it's really impressive
that you can not
only be astronauts,
but have very thoughtful views
on how commercial secretary
can help, thank you.
The Vice President:
Very good.
Let me recognize
our NASA administrator
for the last question
for the panel
and then we'll move
toward wrapping up.
Jim Bridenstine:
Thank you, Mr. Vice President.
In the previous panel, I talked
about how some people say
that every dollar we spend
studying other planets
is a dollar we're not spending
studying our own planet.
Similarly, I hear frequently
that every dollar
we spend studying the moon
or going to the moon
or developing the technologies
and capabilities for the moon,
those are dollars that we're
not spending going to Mars.
And Colonel Collins,
I heard you very clearly say --
you mentioned the Pathways
Report, which, of course,
came out when I was still
serving in the Congress.
And, of course, it was chaired
by another famous Indianan,
Mitch Daniels.
And I was wondering
if you could share with us,
"How do you see our effort
getting to the moon enabling,
ultimately, our path
to get to Mars?"
Colonel Collins:
Well, as a former test pilot
(laughter), I believe
in the buildup approach.
So, to get somewhere
as safe as possible,
you want to write a test plan,
and you want to have
a buildup approach.
So, to control what
you're doing, you test it
and then you add a variable,
you test it, you add
another variable, you test it.
So, I think by, you know,
we can use the moon
as a stepping stone.
Right now we're testing on the
Space Station which is critical.
But the Space Station doesn't
have dust, for example,
so, how do we know that
this life support equipment
isn't just going to fail
because there's too much
dust in the valves
or in the equipment;
the radiation environment?
So, the moon is
a stepping stone.
To me, it's just critical.
If I'm going to go
to the moon and live there,
I would like to know
that this equipment
that's keeping me alive
has worked on the moon.
So, that's the reason
I said that.
Jim Bridenstine:
The Pathways Report
specifically referenced the moon
as "the quickest way to get to
Mars," is that correct?
If I remember right, either way?
Colonel Collins: Well,
I think you're saying that.
I think, yes,
that's true.
Jim Bridenstine:
Yeah.
Colonel Collins:
I do believe that.
Although, I would say,
I was thinking of --
the 10 critical technologies.
And I believe the vast
majority of those
can be tested on the moon.
And I'm trying to remember
what they are all right now.
Like, for example,
one of them is the suits
that the astronauts will be
using on the surface,
got to be tested
on the surface of Mars.
The habitats are another one;
tested on the surface
of the moon before Mars.
So, that's -- as far as whether
or not it's the fastest way,
that I would say
would be up to debate.
Jim Bridenstine:
Okay.
Colonel Collins: And it
would need to be
studied a little bit more.
But I would take it from
the experts that it would be,
probably, the safest way.
Jim Bridenstine:
Got it.
Colonel Collins:
I definitely believe
it would be the safest way.
Jim Bridenstine:
Got it.
Thank you, Mr. Vice President.
The Vice President:
No, thank you, Jim,
thank you very much.
And join me in thanking
this outstanding panel
for their remarks
and also their service
to the country,
great job.
(applause)
I also wanted to mention
that these are not
the only astronauts in the room.
This is an extraordinary
group of Americans,
but we're also joined today
by three astronauts
that I wanted to recognize.
One is a member of the
Council's Advisory Group
which will be meeting
for the first time tomorrow,
he's flown in space four times,
walked in space seven times,
and he happens
to be from Indiana,
astronaut David Wolf is with us.
David we're honored,
please stand up.
(applause)
Also, the President
mentioned these two,
but they didn't
get to stand up.
Jack Schmitt was
the first geologist
on the moon in Apollo 17,
a former Senator
from New Mexico,
and, Jack, I want
to promise you
that we're going to
put more geologists
and scientists on the moon.
Jack, please stand up and let
us thank you for your service.
Thank you, sir.
(applause)
And, lastly, one of the
heroes of my youth,
although you may not
like me saying that.
(laughter)
He was a Gemini astronaut,
second man on the moon,
Apollo 11,
and is one of
the greatest voices
for getting America back
to the moon and on to Mars.
The incomparable Dr.
Buzz Aldrin is with us today.
Thank you, Buzz.
(applause)
Let me, before I close,
I wanted to recognize
two members of the cabinet
who are with us today
for a few brief remarks
on what they gleaned from this
presentation and their focus.
Dan Coats is the Director
of National Intelligence
for the United States.
And, Mr. Director,
you're recognized.
Director Coats: Well,
Mr. Vice President,
thank you for the opportunity to,
first of all, the honor,
to be part of the Space Council.
This is quite an extraordinary
experience today
with an awful lot
of promise ahead.
And I thank you for that
opportunity to be part of it.
I've been around long enough
to go all the way back
to the launch of Sputnik,
the first piece of now
debris in space.
Joining tens of thousands,
if not hundreds of thousands
of pieces of debris,
that's one of the questions
that we have to deal with.
Because as an
intelligence agency,
we do develop,
build, launch satellites
and instruments into space.
We collect from a realm
of ground, sea, air,
up to a certain altitude
and now the realm of space
and it's incredibly
important for us
because we provide information
from those collections
that provide security and safety
to the American people.
And so, it's a very
essential piece.
We join with General Dunford
with the military
in terms of providing
war fighters the need --
the intelligence they need
that can be garnered
from assets in space,
as well as our citizens
in our country
in terms of what we do up there.
I could give you
some exciting examples,
but it's classified,
so I can't do it.
(laughter)
But just trust me;
it's something that's
absolutely essential.
And to be part of this effort
in joining from --
with the perspective from
the intelligence community
is a true privilege.
I think most of us
in this room reach back
to that day with a launch
toward the moon.
The message that came back,
that was one of the most
exciting times of my lifetime.
And I think we're now on the
cusp of moving into a new era
where young people
will be growing up
looking at some phenomenal
things happening in space.
And this is a great way
to kick it off.
Thank you Mr. President --
Vice President.
The Vice President:
Thank you, Dan, great job.
(applause)
The Director of the Office
of Management and Budget,
Mick Mulvaney.
Director Mulvaney:
I just wonder how often Coats
has used that line
about wanting to tell us
something, but not being able to
because it's classified, so --
(Laughter)
-- Mr. Vice President,
thank you for doing this.
I always, when we do these,
the takeaways for me --
the aspirational concepts here,
the aspirational rhetoric
is absolutely critical;
there's no question about it.
There is no -- nothing --
there is nothing
more aspirational
than what we've talked
about here today.
At the same point, it's very
practical analysis
that we're doing.
So, that the practical takeaways
are what the value is to me,
so, to have folks that
who actually are in the industry
and come in and challenge
us on specifics.
I think it was Colonel Virts
who said,
"Well, maybe the gateway
is not something
that helps us
get to Mars faster.
Maybe it is,
maybe it isn't."
But there's a practical
takeaway from that
that helps spur this debate
which we have to have.
I also heard Colonel Collins
talk about,
"keeping missions simpler,"
and trying to find technologies
that are more readily available.
Those are the practical
kind of takeaways
that I think are helpful to me.
I also like it when people say
there's way to do it cheaper.
You all didn't say that nearly
enough, but that's okay --
(laughter)
-- we can get to
that part later.
So, thank you for doing it
because I do think
that at the end of the day
this is more than just
a group of people
getting together
and talking about something
that they all have
a common interest in;
this is actually something
that moves the ball
in the right direction
and I appreciate you doing it.
(applause)
The Vice President:
Well, seeing that no other
members
of the National Space Council
seeking recognition
let me thank you all
for your time and your efforts.
These are extraordinarily
busy people
and we also want to not only
thank the cabinet members
who are here,
but the deputy secretaries
and the undersecretaries
who adjoin us, as well.
Little bit of housekeeping.
For National Space
Council members,
if you have an
outstanding assignment,
please work with
our executive secretary
to complete them.
Dr. Pace and his staff
are going to ensure
that you have what
you need to follow-up
on Space Policy Directive-3.
And we'll be working
energetically before
the next Space Council
meeting to move forward.
With that mention,
let me invite the room
to thank Dr. Pace
and Jared Stout
for their work putting together,
for all the space content.
(applause)
You can see a rather
memorable picture of myself
and the President and the staff
in the National Space Council
in the Oval Office
when they've stopped in
to tell the President
about the plans for this
upcoming meeting
and our plans to have it
here at the White House.
And he promptly ushered them
behind the Resolute desk
and took a photograph
and then sat them down
for the better part
of an hour to talk about
(laughter) the space program
and his enthusiasm
was evidence again today.
Second to last,
let me thank members
of the National Space Council's
Users' Advisory Group
who are here with us today.
The President
recognized many of you,
but the men and women
who are gathered here
coming out of private
enterprise and public life
really represent the bull work
of some of the greatest
and the most innovative
minds in organizations
in and around the space
enterprise in the United States.
And I know that tomorrow
the User Advisory Group
will meet for the first time.
And I just want to assure you
that all the members
of the National Space Council
see your input and your council
as vital as we revive
American leadership in space
and ensure that the Presidents'
vision for the moon, Mars,
and beyond becomes a reality.
So, if everyone would thank me
in joining the User
Advisory Group members
who are here with us today.
(applause)
Lastly, allow me just to
thank the President
for his hospitality.
I think by hosting us here
at the White House
the President
sent a clear message
about the priority of
American leadership in space
to not only all those
gathered here,
but those looking on
and people across the country
and in the wider world.
I want to thank all of you
for being a part of this,
thank our panelists again,
but truly grateful
for the President's leadership,
for his vision, for his energy.
I think thanks to the efforts
of all of you,
and thanks to the leadership
of President Donald Trump,
American is leading
in space, once again.
So, thank you all very much.
We'll go right back to work,
and we'll see you
at the next meeting
in the National Space Council.